#summary Breaking News, Last Minute Issues, Other Important Stuff
#labels Featured

= Please Read This Before Using MacFUSE =

== MacFUSE Core 0.2.0 ==

  * This is a major and strongly recommended update (please see the [CHANGELOG] for details). Unless you have some very good reason not to, please update to this version as soon as possible.

== MacFUSE Core 0.1.9 ==

=== Asynchronous Writes ===

Please don't use the `nosyncwrites` option in 0.1.9. There's still a missing detail that's to be implemented.

== MacFUSE Core 0.1.8 ==

0.1.8 was not released.

== MacFUSE Core 0.1.7 and Older ==

=== Bootcamp NTFS Volumes ===

If you are using any MacFUSE version older than *and* including 0.1.7, *and* you are having trouble seeing your Bootcamp NTFS volume in the Startup Disk preference pane, you can fix the issue as follows:

1. Open the file `/System/Library/Filesystems/fusefs.fs/Contents/Info.plist` in a text editor or a property list editor. Since this file is owned by `root`, you will need super-user access to edit it.

2. Find the line that says `<key>NTFS</key>` (should be line number `72` or so). Change the line so that it reads:

`<key>NTFS-3g</key>`

3. Save the file. Quit System Preferences if it is running. Start System Preferences. You should see the NTFS volume in the Startup Disk preference pane now.

Note that besides MacFUSE's fusefs.fs bundle, another non-Apple .fs bundle could be "taking over" the NTFS personality too -- so make sure.

=== Asynchronous Writes ===

Please don't use the `nosyncwrites` option in 0.1.7. It's not fully implemented yet.